.TH squid 8 "squid version 2.0"
.\" Copyright and licensing information
.\" goes here.
.SH NAME
squid \- proxy caching server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B squid
[
.B \-dhsvzCDFNRVYX
] [
.BI \-f " config-file"
] [
\-[
.B au
] 
.I port
] [
.B \-k " signal"
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B squid
is a high-performance proxy caching server for web clients,
supporting FTP, gopher, and HTTP data objects.  Unlike traditional
caching software, 
.B squid
handles all requests in a single, non-blocking, I/O-driven process.
.PP
.B squid
keeps meta data and especially hot objects cached in RAM, 
caches DNS lookups, supports non-blocking DNS lookups, and implements
negative caching of failed requests.
.PP
.B squid
supports SSL, extensive access controls, and full request 
logging.  By using the lightweight Internet Cache Protocol, 
.B squid
caches can be arranged in a hierarchy or mesh for additional 
bandwidth savings.
.PP
.B squid
consists of a main server program squid, a Domain Name System
lookup program dnsserver, some optional programs for rewriting
requests and performing authentication, and some management and client
tools.  When squid starts up, it spawns a configurable number of
dnsserver processes, each of which can perform a single, blocking
Domain Name System (DNS) lookup.  This reduces the amount of time the
cache waits for DNS lookups.
.PP
.B squid
is derived from the ARPA-funded Harvest Project 
http://harvest.cs.colorado.edu/
.PP
This manual page only lists the command line arguments.  For details
on how to configure
.B squid
see the file 
.BI /etc/squid/squid.conf,
the FAQ included with the distribution
and the documentation at the
.B squid
home page http://www.squid-cache.org
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-a port"
Specify HTTP port number (default: 3128).
.IP "-d level"
Write debugging to stderr also.
.IP "-f file"
Use the given config-file instead of
.IR /etc/squid/squid.conf .
If the file name starts with a ! or | then it is assumed to be an external
command or command line. Can for example be used to pre-process the
configuration before it is being read by Squid. To facilitate this Squid
also understands the common #line notion to indicate the real source file.
.IP -h
Print help message.
.IP "-k reconfigure | rotate | shutdown | interrupt | kill | debug | check | parse"
Parse configuration file, then send signal to running copy 
(except -k parse) and exit.
.IP -s
Enable logging to syslog.
.IP "-u port"
Specify ICP port number (default: 3130), disable with 0.
.IP -v
Print version.
.IP -z
Create swap directories
.IP -C
Do not catch fatal signals.
.IP -D
Disable initial DNS tests.
.IP -F
Don't serve any requests until store is rebuilt.
.IP -N
No daemon mode.
.IP -R
Do not set REUSEADDR on port.
.IP -V
Virtual host httpd-accelerator.
.IP -X
Force full debugging.
.IP -Y
Only return UDP_HIT or UDP_MISS_NOFETCH during fast reload.   
.SH FILES
.I /etc/squid/squid.conf
.RS
The main configuration file.  You must initially make 
changes to this file for 
.B squid
to work.  For example, the default configuration does not 
allow access from any browser.

.\" Could add the following sections:
.\" .SH ENVIRONMENT
.\" .SH DIAGNOSTICS
.\" .SH BUGS
.\" .SH AUTHOR
.\" .SH SEE ALSO

