Squid 3.1.PRE1 release notesSquid Developers$Id: release-3.1.man,v 1.4 2008/01/11 03:49:18 amosjeffries Exp $This document contains the release notes for version 3.1 of Squid.
Squid is a WWW Cache application developed by the National Laboratory
for Applied Network Research and members of the Web Caching community.Notice

.Pp
The Squid Team are pleased to announce the release of Squid-3.1.PRE1 for pre-release testing.
.Pp
This new release is available for download from  or the \&.
.Pp
A large number of the show-stopper bugs have been fixed along with general improvements to the ICAP support.
While this release is not deemed ready for production use, we believe it is ready for wider testing by the community.
.Pp
We welcome feedback and bug reports. If you find a bug, please see  for how to submit a report with a stack trace.
.Pp
Known issues

.Pp
Although this release is deemed good enough for testing in many setups, please note the existence of \&.
.Pp
Changes since earlier PRE releases of Squid-3.0

.Pp
The 3.1 change history can be \&.
.Pp
Changes since Squid-3.0

.SH Major new features

.Pp
Squid 3.1 represents a new feature release above 3.0.
.Pp
The most important of these new features are:
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
IPv6 Support
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
Most user-facing changes are reflected in squid.conf (see below).
.Pp
Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6)

.Pp
Squid 3.1 supports IPv6. To enable IPv6 support, use the ./configure --enable-ipv6 option
.Pp
New Features for IPv6

.Pp
Squid handles localhost values seperately. For the purpose of ACLs and also external
connections ::1 is considered a seperate IP from 127.0.0.1. This means all ACL which
define behaviour for localhost may need ::1/128 included.
.Pp
.Pp
--with-localhost-ipv6 option is provided for Pure-IPv6 setups who do not want to be
bothered by the localhost vagaries. It will enable logics to map all localhost traffic
through ::1 unless an IPv4-only link is required.
.Pp
.Pp
Additional ./configure --with-ipv4-mapped option is provided for OS that require a socket setting
to accept IPv4 addresses on IPv6 sockets, squid performs v4-mapping on these addresses
It is intended primarily to be used for Windows Vista builds.
.Pp
.Pp
Pinger has been upgraded to perform both ICMP and ICMPv6 as required.
As a result of this and due to a change in the binary protocol format between them,
new builds of squid are no longer backwards-compatible with old pinger binaries.
You will need to perform \&"make install-pinger\&" again after installing squid.
.Pp
.Pp
Peer and Client SNMP tables have been altered to handle IPv6 addresses.
As a side effect of this the long-missing fix to show seperate named peers on one IP
has been integrated. Making the SNMP peer table now produce correct output.
The table structure change is identical for both IPv4-only and Dual modes but with
IPv4-only simply not including any IP6 entries. This means any third-party SNMP
software which hard coded the MIB paths needs to be upgraded for this Squid release.
.Pp
.Pp
Limitations of IPv6 Support

.Pp
Specify a specific tcp_outgoing_address and the clients who match its ACL are limited
to the IPv4 or IPv6 network that address belongs to. They are not permitted over the
IPv4-IPv6 boundary. Some ACL voodoo can however be applied to explicitly route the
IPv6/IPv4 bound traffic out an appropriate interface.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
    acl toIP6 dst ipv6
    tcp_outgoing_address 2001::1 toIP6
    tcp_outgoing_address 10.0.0.1 !toIP6
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.Pp
WCCP is not available (neither version 1 or 2). It remains built into squid for use with IPv4 traffic but IPv6 cannot use it.
.Pp
.Pp
Transparent/Interception is done via NAT at the OS level and is not available in IPv6.
Squid will ensure that any port set with transparent or tproxy options be an IPv4-only
listening address. Wildcard can still be used but will not open as an IPv6.
To ensure that squid can accept IPv6 traffic on its default port, an alternative should
be chosen to handle transparent traffic.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
   http_port 3128
   http_port 8080 transparent
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.Pp
The bundled NTLM Auth helper is IPv4-native between itself and the NTLM server.
A new one will be needed for IPv6 traffic between the helper and server.
.Pp
.Pp
The bundled RADIUS Auth helper is IPv4-native, both in traffic between and data storage
with the RADIUS server. A new helper will be needed for IPv6 RADIUS protocol.
.Pp
.Pp
.SH Changes to squid.conf

.Pp
There have been changes to Squid's configuration file since Squid-3.0.
.Pp
This section gives a thorough account of those changes in three categories:
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
.Pp
.Pp
New tags

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "pinger_enable"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
New option to enable/disable the ICMP pinger helper with a reconfigure instead of a full rebuild.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
        Control whether the pinger is active at run-time.
        Enables turning ICMP pinger on and off with a simple squid -k reconfigure.
        default is on when --enable-icmp is compiled in.
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "dns_v4_fallback"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
New option to prevent squid from always looking up IPv4 regardless of whether IPv6 addresses are found.
Squid will follow a policy of prefering IPv6 links, keeping the IPv4 only as a safety net behind IPv6.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
        Standard practice with DNS is to lookup either A or AAAA records
        and use the results if it succeeds. Only looking up the other if
        the first attempt fails or otherwise produces no results.

        That policy however will cause squid to produce error pages for some
        servers that advertise AAAA but are unreachable over IPv6.

        If this is ON  squid will always lookup both AAAA and A, using both.
        If this is OFF squid will lookup AAAA and only try A if none found.

        WARNING: There are some possibly unwanted side-effects with this on:
                *) Doubles the load placed by squid on the DNS network.
                *) May negatively impact connection delay times.
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "include"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
New option to import entire secondary configuration files into squid.conf.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
        Squid will follow the files immediately and insert all their content
        as if it was at that position in squid.conf. As per squid.conf some
        options are order-specific within the config as a whole.

        A few layers of include are allowed, but too many are confusing and
        squid will enforce an include depth of 16 files.

        Syntax:
                include /path/to/file1 /path/to/file2
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
Changes to existing tags

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "acl"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
New preset content
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
        <p>ipv6 - now available as a preset type in the src and dst ACL matching all of the public IPv6 network space.
        <verb>
    acl aclname dst ipv6
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "external_acl_type"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
New options 'ipv4' and 'ipv6' are added to set the IPv4/v6 protocol between squid and its helpers.
Please be aware of some limits to these options. These options only affet the transport protocol used
to send data to and from the helpers. Squid in IPv6-mode may still send %SRC addresses in IPv4 or IPv6
format, so all helpers will need to be checked and converted to cope with such information cleanly.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
          ipv4 / ipv6   IP-mode used to communicate to this helper.
                        For compatability with older configurations and helpers
                        'ipv4' is the default unless --with-localhost-ipv6 is used.
                        --with-localhost-ipv6 changes the default to 'ipv6'.
                        SPECIAL NOTE: explicit use of these options override --with-localhost-ipv6
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "tcp_outgoing_address"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
This option causes some problems when bridging IPv4 and IPv6. A workaround has been provided.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
        Squid is built with a capability of bridging the IPv4 and IPv6 internets.
        tcp_outgoing_address as previously used breaks this bridging by forcing
        all outbound traffic through a certain IPv4 which may be on the wrong
        side of the IPv4/IPv6 boundary.

        To operate with tcp_outgoing_address and keep the bridging benefits
        an additional ACL needs to be used which ensures the IPv6-bound traffic
        is never forced or permitted out the IPv4 interface.

        acl to_ipv6 dst ipv6
        tcp_outgoing_address 2002::c001 good_service_net to_ipv6
        tcp_outgoing_address 10.0.0.2 good_service_net !to_ipv6

        tcp_outgoing_address 2002::beef normal_service_net to_ipv6
        tcp_outgoing_address 10.0.0.1 normal_service_net !to_ipv6

        tcp_outgoing_address 2002::1 to_ipv6
        tcp_outgoing_address 10.0.0.3 !to_ipv6
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "balance_on_multiple_ip"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
The previous default behavour (rotate per-request) of this setting causes failover clashes with IPv6 built-in mechanisms.
It has thus been turned off by default. Making the 'best choice' IP continue in use for any hostname until it encounters a connection failure and failover drops to the next known IP.
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
       Modern IP resolvers in squid sort lookup results by preferred access.
       By default squid will use these IP in order and only rotates to
       the next listed when the most preffered fails.

       Some load balancing servers based on round robin DNS have been
       found not to preserve user session state across requests
       to different IP addresses.

       Enabling this directive Squid rotates IP's per request.
        
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
Removed tags

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
.SH Changes to ./configure Options

.Pp
There have been some changes to Squid's build configuration since Squid-3.0.
.Pp
This section gives an account of those changes in three categories:
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.nr bi 1
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
.Pp
New options

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "--enable-ipv6"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Buildwith IPv6 support. The default is to build without.
.Pp
.IP "--with-localhost-ipv6"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Build support for squid to map all 127.0.0.1 traffic onto ::1.
The default is to build with 127.0.0.1 and ::1 being considered seperate IP.
see the IPv6 details above for a better description. 
.Pp
.IP "--with-ipv6-split-stack"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Enable special additions for IPv6 support in Windows XP.
see the IPv6 details above for a better description.
.Pp
.IP "--with-ipv4-mapped"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Enable special additions for IPv6 support in Windows Vista.
see the IPv6 details above for a better description.
.Pp
.IP "--with-dns-cname"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Enable CNAME recursion within the Internal DNS resolver stub squid uses.
This has no effect on the external DNS helper.
Please note this extension is still experimental and may encounter problems.
To see if it is actually needed you can run squid without it for a period and
check the CNAME-Only Requests statistics squid maintains.
If it produces ongoing serious problems the external helper may be needed
but please report the bugs anyway.
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
Changes to existing options

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "--disable-internl-dns"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Better support for Linux using the external DNS helper.
The helper will compile and work with dns_nameservers on more variants of Linux than previously.
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
Not yet available options

.Pp
These configure options have not yet been ported to Squid-3. If you need something to do then
porting one of these from Squid-2 to Squid-3 is most welcome.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "--enable-devpoll"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Support for Solaris /dev/poll
.Pp
.IP "--enable-select-simple"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Basic POSIX select() loop without any binary fd_set optimizations.
.Pp
.IP "--enable-follow-x-forwarded-for"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Support following the X-Forwarded-For HTTP header for determining the
client IP address
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
Removed options

.Pp
The following configure options have been removed.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
